Spatial Allocator v4.3 User's Guide

------------

Chapter 4. Raster Tools
===

Background
----------

The Spatial Allocator (SA) Raster Tools system is designed to process
image or raster spatial data sets in SA. It contains programs to process
various kinds of spatial data for meteorological and air quality
modeling, particularly within the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF)
(<http://www2.mmm.ucar.edu/wrf/users/>) and Community Multiscale Air
Quality (CMAQ) (<http://www.cmascenter.org/cmaq/>) modeling systems. The
Raster Tools include land cover data processing tools, satellite cloud
and aerosol product processing tools, agricultural fertilizer modeling
tools, a domain grid shapefile generation tool, and other utilities.

All sample script files for the SA Raster Tools are stored in the
raster\_scripts directory of the installed Spatial Allocator system.

Troubleshooting
---------------

Users who have difficulties running the tools with the compiled
libraries contained within the downloaded Spatial Allocator system
should do the following:

1)  delete installed open-source library directories under the
    ./src/libs directory

2)  download new source packages and install them under the ./libs
    directory

3)  compile downloaded packages and install them under
    {package\_path}/local, following the src/libs/README file

4)  modify paths in ./bin/sa\_setup.csh and ./src/raster/Makefile

5)  in ./src/raster, do the following:

-   make clean

-   make

-   make install

Domain Description in SA Raster Tools
=====================================

The SA Raster Tools define the modeling domain using the following
environment variables:

-   GRID\_PROJ – defines the domain grid projection using the PROJ4
    projection description format
    (<http://www.remotesensing.org/geotiff/proj_list/>). The following
    sample projection descriptions are used to match the projections in
    WRF:

    -   Lambert Conformal Conic: "+proj=lcc +a=6370000.0 +b=6370000.0
        +lat\_1=33 +lat\_2=45 +lat\_0=40 +lon\_0=-97"

    -   Polar stereographic: "+proj=stere +a=6370000.0 +b=6370000.0
        +lat\_ts=33 +lat\_0=90 +lon\_0=-97 +k\_0=1.0"

    -   Mercator: "+proj=merc +a=6370000.0 +b=6370000.0 +lat\_ts=33
        +lon\_0=0"

    -   Geographic: "+proj=latlong +a=6370000.0 +b=6370000.0"

-   GRID\_ROWS – number of rows of grid cells in the domain

-   GRID\_COLUMNS – number of columns of grid cells in the domain

-   GRID\_XCELLSIZE – grid cell size in *x* direction

-   GRID\_YCELLSIZE – grid cell size in *y* direction

-   GRID\_XMIN – minimum *x* of the domain (lower left corner of the
    domain)

-   GRID\_YMIN – minimum *y* of the domain (lower left corner of the
    domain)

-   GRID\_NAME – name of the domain, which is required by some of the
    tools

For WRF simulations, GRID\_XMIN and GRID\_YMIN can be computed using the
first point longitude and latitude from the global attributes
corner\_lons and corner\_lats in the domain’s WRF GEOGRID output file.
For instance, to compute a WRF Lambert Conformal Conic (LCC) domain with
the GEOGRID output file attributes

> :corner\_lats = 20.85681f, 52.1644f, 50.63151f, 19.88695f,
> 20.84302f...
>
> :corner\_lons = -121.4918f, -135.7477f, -53.21942f, -69.02478f,
> -121.5451f…

users would use the cs2cs utility in the PROJ4 library directly at the
command line (after installing the SA system):

> &gt;cs2cs +proj=latlong +a=6370000.0 +b=6370000.0 +to +proj=lcc
> +a=6370000.0 +b=6370000.0 +lat\_1=33 +lat\_2=45 +lat\_0=40 +lon\_0=-97
>
> -121.4918 20.85681
>
> -2622003.85 -1793999.28 0.00

Minimum *x* and *y* for the domain would be computed as follows:

> GRID\_XMIN = -2622003.85 - GRID\_XCELLSIZE / 2
>
> GRID\_YMIN = -1793999.28 - GRID\_YCELLSIZE / 2

Land Cover Data Processing Tools
================================

There are two land cover processing tools in the SA Raster Tools: NLCD
and MODIS land cover generation tool (Section 3.1), and Biogenic
Emissions Landcover Database, version 4 (BELD4) land cover generation
tool (Section 3.2).

NLCD and MODIS Land Cover Generation
------------------------------------

The computeGridLandUse.exe tool is used to generate land cover data for
the upgraded WRF/CMAQ Pleim-Xiu Land Surface Model (PX LSM) in the
current WRF model release, by directly using downloaded 2001, 2006, or
2011 National Land Cover Data (NLCD) land cover data and the NASA
Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) land cover
products MCD12Q1 or MOD12Q1. This tool generates 40 land cover classes
(20 from MODIS and 20 from NLCD) instead of the 50 classes generated by
the previous land cover processing tool.

This tool requires the following data sets:

-   NLCD land cover, canopy, and imperviousness data – can be obtained
    from <http://www.mrlc.gov/nlcd2006.php>.

-   MODIS land cover data sets – can be obtained from
    [http://ladsweb.nascom.nasa.gov/
    data/search.html](http://ladsweb.nascom.nasa.gov/data/search.html).
    The tool can process MCD12Q1 data at 500 m from Combined Terra and
    Aqua MODIS, or can process MOD12Q1 data at 1 km from Terra MODIS.

-   List of land cover data sets to be processed – this file has to have
    fixed header formats. Provided in the data directory are sample
    files for CMAQ 12-km domain 2001, 2006 and 2011 modeling:
    nlcd\_modis\_files\_2001.txt, nlcd\_modis\_files\_2006.txt, and
    nlcd\_modis\_files\_2011.txt. Users have to modify the list file
    based on their NLCD and MODIS data location and names.

To run the computeGridLandUse tool, users can use the following sample
script file, which has all of the required environment variables:

**NLCD\_MODIS\_processor.csh**

The tool generates one ASCII file and one NetCDF file:

-   The ASCII file contains the imperviousness, canopy, and land cover
    > percent variables (if the user set all land cover data to “YES”
    > when running the script file) for each grid cell, in
    > comma-separated-values (CSV) format.

-   The NetCDF file contains imperviousness, canopy, and land cover
    > fraction variables plus land/water mask and other variables that
    > are similar to those in the WRF GEOGRID land cover output files.
    > The land cover percentage variable contains the 40 classes in
    > Table 1.

**Table 1. NLCD/MODIS output land cover classes from the
computeGridLandUse tool.**

  Array Index   MODIS Class IGBP (Type 1)   Class Name                           Array Index   NLCD Class   Class Name
  ------------- --------------------------- ------------------------------------ ------------- ------------ ------------------------------
  1             1                           Evergreen Needleleaf forest          21            11           Open Water
  2             2                           Evergreen Broadleaf forest           22            12           Perennial Ice/Snow
  3             3                           Deciduous Needleleaf forest          23            21           Developed - Open Space
  4             4                           Deciduous Broadleaf forest           24            22           Developed - Low Intensity
  5             5                           Mixed forest                         25            23           Developed - Medium Intensity
  6             6                           Closed shrublands                    26            24           Developed High Intensity
  7             7                           Open shrublands                      27            31           Barren Land (Rock/Sand/Clay)
  8             8                           Woody savannas                       28            41           Deciduous Forest
  9             9                           Savannas                             29            42           Evergreen Forest
  10            10                          Grasslands                           30            43           Mixed Forest
  11            11                          Permanent wetlands                   31            51           Dwarf Scrub
  12            12                          Croplands                            32            52           Shrub/Scrub
  13            13                          Urban and built-up                   33            71           Grassland/Herbaceous
  14            14                          Cropland/Natural vegetation mosaic   34            72           Sedge/Herbaceous
  15            15                          Snow and ice                         35            73           Lichens
  16            16                          Barren or sparsely vegetated         36            74           Moss
  17            0                           Water                                37            81           Pasture/Hay
  18            18                          Reserved (e.g., Unclassified)        38            82           Cultivated Crops
  19            19                          Reserved (e.g., Fill Value )         39            90           Woody Wetlands
  20            20                          Reserved                             40            95           Emergent Herbaceous Wetlands

[[[[[[[[[[[[[]{#_Toc357440520 .anchor}]{#_Toc357435005
.anchor}]{#_Toc357192619 .anchor}]{#_Toc357176048
.anchor}]{#_Toc357175577 .anchor}]{#_Toc357175222
.anchor}]{#_Toc357174708 .anchor}]{#_Toc357173415
.anchor}]{#_Toc357110954 .anchor}]{#_Toc357110841
.anchor}]{#_Toc357110275 .anchor}]{#_Toc318316552
.anchor}]{#_Toc318316031 .anchor}

BELD4 Land Cover Generation
---------------------------

The BELD4 data with land cover, tree, and crop percentages can be
computed using the computeGridLandUse\_beld4.exe tool with directly
downloaded USGS NLCD data sets, NASA MODIS land cover (MCD12Q1 or
MOD12Q1) data tiles and tree and crop fractions at the county level. The
follow­ing sample script file contains all of the required environment
variables for running the tool:

> **landuseTool\_WRFCMAQ\_BELD4.csh**

This tool requires the following data sets:

-   Downloaded USGS NLCD data sets, including land cover,
    imperviousness, and canopy, can be obtained from the NLCD web site:
    <http://www.mrlc.gov/nlcd2006.php>.

-   MODIS land cover tiles (MCD12Q1 or MOD12Q1) – can be obtained from
    the NASA MODIS land products web site:
    <http://modis-land.gsfc.nasa.gov/landcover.html>.

-   List of land cover data sets to be processed – this file has to be
    fixed format with the data set headers included. Provided in the
    data directory are sample files for CMAQ 12-km domain 2001, 2006 and
    2011 modeling: nlcd\_modis\_files\_2001.txt,
    nlcd\_modis\_files\_2006.txt, and nlcd\_modis\_files\_2011.txt.
    Users have to modify the list file based on their NLCD and MODIS
    data location and names.

-   BELD3 FIA tree fraction table at county level – provided in the data
    directory: beld3-fia.dat.

-   National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) crop fraction tables
    at county level – provided in the data directory:
    nass2001\_beld4\_ag.dat for the 2001 NASS; nass2006\_beld4\_ag.dat
    for the 2006 NASS.

-   Canada crop fraction table at Census-division level – provided in
    the data directory: can01\_beld4\_ag.dat for the 2001 Census of
    Agriculture; can06\_beld4\_ag.dat for the 2006 Census of
    Agriculture.

-   List of land cover, tree, and crop classes for the BELD4 tool –
    provided in the data direc­tory: beld4\_class\_names\_40classes.txt.

-   U.S. county shapefile – provided in the data directory:
    county\_pophu02\_48st.shp.

-   Canada Census-division shapefiles – provided in the data directory:
    can2001\_cd\_sel.shp for the 2001 Census; can2006\_cd\_sel.shp for
    the 2006 Census.

The tool generates one ASCII file and one NetCDF file:

-   The ASCII file contains the imperviousness, canopy, and land cover
    fraction variables (if the user set all land cover data to “YES”
    when running the script file) for each grid cell, in CSV format.

-   The NetCDF file contains imperviousness, canopy, land cover, tree,
    and crop percentage variables as well as land/water mask and other
    variables that are similar to those in the WRF GEOGRID land cover
    output files.

The land cover data generated by applying this tool are used in CMAQ
bidirectional ammonia flux modeling and are used in CMAQ biogenic, land
surface, and dry deposition modeling. The land cover percentage array in
the output contains 20 NLCD land cover classes and 20 MODIS IGBP land
cover classes (see Table 1). The tree percentage variable in the NetCDF
output file contains the 194 BELD4 tree classes shown in Table 2, and
the crop percentage variable contains the 42 crops listed in Table 3.

**Table 2. BELD4 tree classes.**

  In­dex   Variable            In­dex   Variable             In­dex   Variable             In­dex   Variable             In­dex   Variable
  -------- ------------------- -------- -------------------- -------- -------------------- -------- -------------------- -------- -------------------
  1        Acacia              40       Hackberry            79       Oak\_bur             118      Paulownia            157      Pine\_whitebark
  2        Ailanthus           41       Hawthorn             80       Oak\_CA\_black       119      Pawpaw               158      Pine\_Wwhite
  3        Alder               42       Hemlock              81       Oak\_CA\_live        120      Persimmon            159      Pine\_yellow
  4        Apple               43       Hickory              82       Oak\_CA\_white       121      Pine\_Apache         160      Populus
  5        Ash                 44       Holly\_American      83       Oak\_canyon\_live    122      Pine\_Austrian       161      Prunus
  6        Basswood            45       Hornbeam             84       Oak\_chestnut        123      Pine\_AZ             162      Redbay
  7        Beech               46       Incense\_cedar       85       Oak\_chinkapin       124      Pine\_Bishop         163      Robinia\_locust
  8        Birch               47       Juniper              86       Oak\_delta\_post     125      Pine\_blackjack      164      Sassafras
  9        Bumelia\_gum        48       KY\_coffeetree       87       Oak\_Durand          126      Pine\_brstlcone      165      Sequoia
  10       Cajeput             49       Larch                88       Oak\_Emery           127      Pine\_chihuahua      166      Serviceberry
  11       Califor-laurel      50       Loblolly\_bay        89       Oak\_Engelmann       128      Pine\_Coulter        167      Silverbell
  12       Cascara-buckthor    51       Madrone              90       Oak\_evergreen\_sp   129      Pine\_digger         168      Smoketree
  13       Castanea            52       Magnolia             91       Oak\_Gambel          130      Pine\_Ewhite         169      Soapberry\_westrn
  14       Catalpa             53       Mahogany             92       Oak\_interio\_live   131      Pine\_foxtail        170      Sourwood
  15       Cedar\_chamaecyp    54       Maple\_bigleaf       93       Oak\_laurel          132      Pine\_jack           171      Sparkleberry
  16       Cedar\_thuja        55       Maple\_bigtooth      94       Oak\_live            133      Pine\_Jeffrey        172      Spruce\_black
  17       Chestnut\_buckeye   56       Maple\_black         95       Oak\_Mexicanblue     134      Pine\_knobcone       173      Spruce\_blue
  18       Chinaberry          57       Maple\_boxelder      96       Oak\_Northrn\_pin    135      Pine\_limber         174      Spruce\_Brewer
  19       Cypress\_cupress    58       Maple\_FL            97       Oak\_Northrn\_red    136      Pine\_loblolly       175      Spruce\_Englemann
  20       Cypress\_taxodium   59       Maple\_mtn           98       Oak\_nuttall         137      Pine\_lodgepole      176      Spruce\_Norway
  21       Dogwood             60       Maple\_Norway        99       Oak\_OR\_white       138      Pine\_longleaf       177      Spruce\_red
  22       Douglas\_fir        61       Maple\_red           100      Oak\_overcup         139      Pine\_Monterey       178      Spruce\_Sitka
  23       East\_hophornbean   62       Maple\_RkyMtn        101      Oak\_pin             140      Pine\_pinyon         179      Spruce\_spp
  24       Elder               63       Maple\_silver        102      Oak\_post            141      Pine\_pinyon\_brdr   180      Spruce\_white
  25       Elm                 64       Maple\_spp           103      Oak\_scarlet         142      Pine\_pinyon\_cmn    181      Sweetgum
  26       Eucalyptus          65       Maple\_striped       104      Oak\_scrub           143      Pine\_pitch          182      Sycamore
  27       Fir\_balsam         66       Maple\_sugar         105      Oak\_shingle         144      Pine\_pond           183      Tallowtree-chins
  28       Fir\_CA\_red        67       Mesquite             106      Oak\_Shumrd\_red     145      Pine\_ponderosa      184      Tamarix
  29       Fir\_corkbark       68       Misc-hardwoods       107      Oak\_silverleaf      146      Pine\_red            185      Tanoak
  30       Fir\_fraser         69       Mixed\_conifer\_sp   108      Oak\_Southrn\_red    147      Pine\_sand           186      Torreya
  31       Fir\_grand          70       Mountain\_ash        109      Oak\_spp             148      Pine\_scotch         187      Tung-oil-tree
  32       Fir\_noble          71       Mulberry             110      Oak\_swamp\_cnut     149      Pine\_shortleaf      188      Unknown\_tree
  33       Fir\_Pacf\_silver   72       Nyssa                111      Oak\_swamp\_red      150      Pine\_slash          189      Walnut
  34       Fir\_SantaLucia     73       Oak\_AZ\_white       112      Oak\_swamp\_white    151      Pine\_spruce         190      Water-elm
  35       Fir\_Shasta\_red    74       Oak\_bear            113      Oak\_turkey          152      Pine\_sugar          191      Willow
  36       Fir\_spp            75       Oak\_black           114      Oak\_water           153      Pine\_Swwhite        192      Yellow\_poplar
  37       Fir\_subalpine      76       Oak\_blackjack       115      Oak\_white           154      Pine\_tablemtn       193      Yellowwood
  38       Fir\_white          77       Oak\_blue            116      Oak\_willow          155      Pine\_VA             194      Yucca\_Mojave
  39       Gleditsia\_locust   78       Oak\_bluejack        117      Osage-orange         156      Pine\_Washoe                   

**Table 3. BELD4 crop classes.**

  Index   Variable           Index   Variable           Index   Variable
  ------- ------------------ ------- ------------------ ------- -------------------
  1       Hay                15      Cotton             29      SorghumSilage
  2       Hay\_ir            16      Cotton\_ir         30      SorghumSilage\_ir
  3       Alfalfa            17      Oats               31      Soybeans
  4       Alfalfa\_ir        18      Oats\_ir           32      Soybeans\_ir
  5       Other\_Grass       19      Peanuts            33      Wheat\_Spring
  6       Other\_Grass\_ir   20      Peanuts\_ir        34      Wheat\_Spring\_ir
  7       Barley             21      Potatoes           35      Wheat\_Winter
  8       Barley\_ir         22      Potatoes\_ir       36      Wheat\_Winter\_ir
  9       BeansEdible        23      Rice               37      Other\_Crop
  10      BeansEdible\_ir    24      Rice\_ir           38      Other\_Crop\_ir
  11      CornGrain          25      Rye                39      Canola
  12      CornGrain\_ir      26      Rye\_ir            40      Canola\_ir
  13      CornSilage         27      SorghumGrain       41      Beans
  14      CornSilage\_ir     28      SorghumGrain\_ir   42      Beans\_ir

[[[[[[[[[[]{#_Toc357586938 .anchor}]{#_Toc357519797
.anchor}]{#_Toc357440521 .anchor}]{#_Toc357435006
.anchor}]{#_Toc357192621 .anchor}]{#_Toc357176050
.anchor}]{#_Toc357175579 .anchor}]{#_Toc357175224
.anchor}]{#_Toc357174710 .anchor}]{#_Toc357173417 .anchor}

Current and Future Development for the Land Cover Data Processing Tools
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

We will enhance the tool to use the released NLCD 2011 data sets with
created 2011 crop tables for both US and Canada. In addition, in the
future we plan to use USDA’s NLCD Cropland Data Layer (CDL) data instead
of NASS crop fractions at the county level for the BELD4 data tool. This
will allow us to use USDA crop spatial coverage NLCD data instead of
county-based crop census data in computing crop fractions within each
grid cell.

Satellite Cloud and Aerosol Product Processing Tools
====================================================

GOES Cloud Product Processing Tool
-----------------------------------

The GOES data tool processes the Geostationary Operational Environmental
Satellite (GOES) data downloaded from the Earth System Science Center
(ESSC) at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. The GOES data web
site is <http://satdas.nsstc.nasa.gov/>.

Downloaded GOES data need to be stored under subdirectories named using
this format: gp\_YYYYMMDD. The ./util/goes\_untar.pl utility can be used
to unzip downloaded GOES data (daily tar files) into the daily
directories required by the tool.

The follow­ing sample script file contains all of the required
environment variables for running the tool:

> **allocateGOES2WRFGrids.csh **

The tool contains the following three programs:

-   correctGOESHeader.exe – to correct GOES data position shifting by
    redefining a new Earth radius and new image extent. The program
    converts GOES data in Grib (i.e., \*.grb) format to files in ERDAS
    Imagine (i.e., \*.img) format with corrections.

-   computeGridGOES.exe – to regrid corrected Imagine-format GOES data
    to a defined grid domain.

-   toDataAssimilationFMT.exe – to convert the gridded NetCDF file into
    a format suitable for WRF assimilation.

The released GOES data has changed to ASCII format from GRIB format last
year. We plan to update the tool in the coming months.

***Note**:* When running the GOES cloud product processing tool, the
Geospatial Data Abstraction Library (GDAL) will generate the following
messages:

-   Warning: Inside GRIB2Inventory, Message \# 2

-   ERROR: Ran out of file reading SECT0

These messages do not indicate any errors in regridding and so can be
ignored.

MODIS Level 2 Cloud/Aerosol Products Tool
-----------------------------------------

The MODIS Level 2 (swath) cloud and aerosol products tool processes
MODIS L2 cloud or aerosol products for a defined grid domain. MODIS data
in HDF4 format can be downloaded from the NASA Level 1 and Atmosphere
Archive and Distribution System (LAADS) web site:
<http://ladsweb.nascom.nasa.gov/data/search.html>.

MODIS cloud product variables contain 5-km and 1-km data. To use this
regridding tool, users need to download the following cloud data and
Level 1 Geolocation 1-km data into the input directory:

-   MOD06\_L2 and MOD03 (Level 1 Geolocation 1-km ) for Terra, or

-   MYD06\_L2 and MYD03 (Level 1 Geolocation 1-km ) for Aqua

The following download options can be selected during the downloading
process:

MODIS Cloud:

-   Select Level 2 products and select L2 Cloud products

-   Select time: “your download time period”

-   Collection 5

-   Select Latitude/Longitude with area longitude and latitude extent

-   Coverage options: select day, night, and both (all)

-   Select all other defaults and click search

-   Display all files

-   Download all files into one directory

MODIS Geolocation 1-km:

-   Select Level 1 products and select 03 Geolocation - 1km

-   Select time: “same as cloud products”

-   Collection 5

-   Select Latitude/Longitude with the above geographic extent

-   Coverage options: select day, night, and both (all)

-   Display all files

-   Download all files into the MODIS Cloud file directory

MODIS aerosol products contain variable data at 10-km resolution
(nadir). Users need to download MOD04 for Terra or MYD04 for Aqua into
the input data directory. The download options below can be selected
when downloading Terra aerosol products. Downloading Aqua aerosol
products involves similar options. The tool generates one NetCDF file
for the defined domain.

-   Select Terra MODIS

-   MODIS Aerosol products

-   Select Level 2 products and select L2 aerosol product

-   Select time: “your download time period”

-   Collection 5

-   Select Latitude/Longitude with area longitude and latitude extent

-   Coverage options: select day, night, and both (all)

-   Select all other defaults and click search

-   Display all files

-   Download all files into one directory

Users can modify the following sample script file provided for
regridding:

> **allocateMODISL2CloudVars2Grids.csh **

OMI Level 2 Product Tool
------------------------

The OMI Level 2 product (swath) tool is used to regrid Ozone Monitoring
Instrument (OMI) L2 aerosol and NO~2~ products for a defined grid
domain. The input data can be downloaded from the NASA mirador site:
[http://mirador.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/mirador/presentNavigation.pl?tree=
project&project=OMI](http://mirador.gsfc.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/mirador/presentNavigation.pl?tree=project&project=OMI).

The downloaded data are in HDF5 format and should be stored in one
directory, which is defined in the following sample script file:

> **allocateOMIL2vars2Grids.csh**

OMI L2G and L3 Product Tools
-----------------------------

The OMI L2G and L3 product tools process the following OMI products:

-   OMI L3 aerosol products (OMAEROe) in HDF4

-   OMI NO2 L2G products (OMNO2G) in HDF4

-   OMI NO2 L3 products (NO2TropCS30) in HDF5

The data can be downloaded from the NASA Giovanni web site:
<http://gdata1.sci.gsfc.nasa.gov/daac-bin/G3/gui.cgi?instance_id=omi>

OMI product information can be viewed from
[http://disc.sci.gsfc.nasa.gov/giovanni/additional/
users-manual/G3\_manual\_Chapter\_10\_OMIL2G.shtml\#what\_l2g](http://disc.sci.gsfc.nasa.gov/giovanni/additional/users-manual/G3_manual_Chapter_10_OMIL2G.shtml#what_l2g)
and from [ftp://aurapar2u.ecs
.nasa.gov/data/s4pa//Aura\_OMI\_Level2/OMAERUV.003/doc/README.OMI\_DUG.pdf](ftp://aurapar2u.ecs.nasa.gov/data/s4pa/Aura_OMI_Level2/OMAERUV.003/doc/README.OMI_DUG.pdf)

The following sample script can be modified for regridding:

> **allocateOMIvar2Grids.csh**

Agricultural Fertilizer Modeling Tools
======================================

There are four tools that can be used when performing Environmental
Policy Integrated Climate (EPIC) modeling; they generate gridded
agricultural fertilizer data to be used in CMAQ bidirectional NH~3~ flux
modeling. These tools are the EPIC site information generation tool, the
MCIP/CMAQ-to-EPIC tool, the EPIC-to-CMAQ tool, and the EPIC yearly
extraction tool (Sections 5.1 through 5.4).They can be called from the
Fertilizer Emission Scenario Tool for CMAQ (FEST-C) interface
(<http://www.cmascenter.org/fest-c/>) based on user input information,
and can be run by script files with defined environment variables at the
command line.

EPIC Site Information Generation Tool
-------------------------------------

This tool generates two CSV data files that are needed to create EPIC
site databases for a user-defined domain:

-   EPICSites\_Info.csv – contains GRIDID, XLONG, YLAT, ELEVATION,
    SLOPE\_P, HUC8, REG10, STFIPS, CNTYFIPS, GRASS, CROPS, CROP\_P,
    COUNTRY, and COUNTRY-PROVINCE items.

-   EPICSites\_Crop.csv – contains GRIDID, 42 crop acreages, COUNTRY,
    and HUC8 items.

The tool processes the set of input spatial data files below, which have
been modified specifically for use with the tool and can be obtained
from the CMAS:

-   BELD4 file for the domain (beld4\_cmaq12km\_2006.nc)

-   U.S. county shapefiles (co99\_d00\_conus\_cmaq\_epic.shp)

-   North American State political boundary shapefile
    (na\_bnd\_camq\_epic.shp)

-   U.S. 8-digit HUC shapefile (conus\_hucs\_8\_cmaq.shp)

-   Elevation image file (na\_dem\_epic.img)

-   Slope image file (na\_slope\_epic.img)

Users can follow the sample script file below, which has all of the
environment variables required for running the tool from the command
line window:

> **generateEPICSiteData.csh**

MCIP/CMAQ-to-EPIC Tool
-----------------------

This tool generates EPIC daily weather and nitrogen deposition data
files from MCIP meteor­ol­ogy and CMAQ nitrogen deposition files for
EPIC modeling sites. The input MCIP and CMAQ data are stored in two
directories defined by the environment variables DATA\_DIR and
DATA\_DIR\_CMAQ.

MCIP output files must have names of the format METCRO2D\*{date} (e.g.,
METCRO2D\_020725). The date format can be in one of the following
formats:

> YYYYMMDD *or* YYMMDD *or* YYYYDDD *or* YYDDD

CMAQ dry and wet deposition files must have names of the format
\*DRYDEP\*{date} and \*WETDEP\*{date} (e.g.,
CCTM\_N4a\_06emisv2soa\_12km\_wrf.DRYDEP.20020630 and
CCTM\_N4a\_06emisv2soa\_12km\_wrf.WETDEP1.20020630). The date can be in
any of the formats listed above.

Deposition inputs for EPIC modeling can take one of the following three
inputs:

1)  Directory containing a CMAQ dry and wet deposition file

2)  Zero – assume zero nitrogen deposition

3)  Default – assume nitrogen mix ratio of 0.8 ppm for wet default
    > deposition computation

The input site location file defined by the environment variable
EPIC\_SITE\_FILE has to be a CSV file, with the first three items being
site ID, longitude, and latitude.

The tool generates three outputs:

-   dailyWETH directory containing EPIC daily weather and nitrogen
    deposition files with names of the format “grid ID”.dly (e.g.,
    96.dly). The daily file contains the 14 variables listed in Table 4.

-   NetCDF file with daily weather and nitrogen deposition data for all
    EPIC sites.

-   EPICW2YR.2YR, to be used for daily weather file input list in EPIC
    modeling.

**Table 4. EPIC daily weather and nitrogen deposition variables.**

  Index   Variable                           Index   Variable
  ------- ---------------------------------- ------- ---------------------------------------
  1       Year                               8       Daily Average Relative Humidity
  2       Month                              9       Daily Average 10m Windspeed (m s\^-1)
  3       Day                                10      Daily Total Wet Oxidized N (g/ha)
  4       Daily Total Radiation (MJ m\^02)   11      Daily Total Wet Reduced N (g/ha)
  5       Daily Maximum 2m Temperature (C)   12      Daily Total Dry Oxidized N (g/ha)
  6       Daily minimum 2m temperature (C)   13      Daily Total Dry Reduced N (g/ha)
  7       Daily Total Precipitation (mm)     14      Daily Total Wet Organic N (g/ha)

Users can follow the sample script file below, which has all of the
environment variables required for running the tool from the command
line window:

> **generateEPICsiteDailyWeatherNdep.csh**

EPIC-to-CMAQ Tool
------------------

This tool processes merged daily output from EPIC simulations for the 42
crops defined for the BELD4 tool output. It generates two types of
outputs in NetCDF format for CMAQ bidirectional NH~3~ modeling:

-   soil output file

-   EPIC daily output files

The 13 variables contained in the soil output file are listed in Table
5.

**Table 5. EPIC-to-CMAQ soil output variables.**

  ------- -------------- -------------------------------- ------- -------------- --------------------------------
  Index   Name           Soil Variable                    Index   Name           Soil Variable
  1       L1\_SoilNum    Soil Number (none)               8       L2\_Bulk\_D    Layer2 Bulk Density (t/m\*\*3)
  2       L1\_Bulk\_D    Layer1 Bulk Density (t/m\*\*3)   9       L2\_Wilt\_P    Layer2 Wilting Point (m/m)
  3       L1\_Wilt\_P    Layer1 Wilting Point(m/m)        10      L2\_Field\_C   Layer2 Field Capacity (m/m)
  4       L1\_Field\_C   Layer1 Field Capacity (m/m)      11      L2\_Porocity   Layer2 Porocity (%)
  5       L1\_Porocity   Layer1 Porocity (%)              12      L2\_PH         Layer2 PH (none)
  6       L1\_PH         Layer1 PH (none)                 13      L2\_Cation     Layer2 Cation Ex (cmol/kg)
  7       L1\_Cation     Layer1 Cation Ex (cmol/kg )                             
  ------- -------------- -------------------------------- ------- -------------- --------------------------------

EPIC daily output files for CMAQ contain the 59 variables listed in
Table 6.

The following sample script file with all required environment variables
can be modified and run at the command line:

> **epic2CMAQ.csh**

**Table 6. EPIC for CMAQ daily output variables.**

  ------- ----------- ---------------------------------------- ------- ---------- ----------------------------------
  Index   Name        Variable                                 Index   Name       Variable
  1       QNO3        N Loss in Surface Runoff (kg/ha)         30      L2\_ON     Layer2 Organic N (kg/ha)
  2       SSFN        N in Subsurface Flow (kg/ha)             31      L2\_P      Layer2 Mineral P (kg/ha)
  3       PRKN        N Loss in Percolate (kg/ha)              32      L2\_OP     Layer2 Organic P (kg/ha)
  4       DN          N-NO3 Denitrification (kg/ha)            33      L2\_C      Layer2 Carbon (kg/ha)
  5       DN2\*       N-N2O from NO3 Denitrification (kg/ha)   34      L2\_NITR   Layer2 N - Nitrified NH3 (kg/ha)
  6       AVOL\*      N-NH3 Emission (kg/ha)                   35      T1\_DEP    Layert Depth (m)
  7       HMN         OC Change by Soil Respiration (kg/ha)    36      T1\_BD     Layert Bulk Density (t/m\*\*3)
  8       NFIX        N Fixation (kg/ha)                       37      T1\_NO3    Layert N - Nitrate (kg/ha)
  9       YP          P Loss with Sediment (kg/ha)             38      T1\_NH3    Layert N - Ammonia (kg/ha)
  10      QAP         Labile P Loss in Runoff (kg/ha)          39      T1\_ON     Layert Organic N (kg/ha)
  11      YON         N Loss with Sediment (kg/ha)             40      T1\_P      Layert Mineral P (kg/ha)
  12      YW          Wind Erosion (ton/ha)                    41      T1\_OP     Layert Organic P (kg/ha)
  13      Q           Runoff (mm)                              42      T1\_C      Layert Carbon (kg/ha)
  14      HUSC        Heat Unit Schedule (none)                43      T1\_NITR   Layert N - Nitrified NH3 (kg/ha)
  15      HU\_BASE0   Base Heat Unit (none)                    44      L1\_ANO3   Layer1 N-NO3 AppRate (kg/ha)
  16      HU\_FRAC    Heat Unit fraction (none)                45      L1\_ANH3   Layer1 N-NH3 AppRate (kg/ha)
  17      L1\_DEP     Layer1 Depth (m)                         46      L1\_AON    Layer1 ON AppRate (kg/ha)
  18      L1\_BD      Layer1 Bulk Density (t/m\*\*3)           47      L1\_AMP    Layer1 MP AppRate (kg/ha)
  19      L1\_NO3     Layer1 N - Nitrate (kg/ha)               48      L1\_AOP    Layer1 OP AppRate (kg/ha)
  20      L1\_NH3     Layer1 N - Ammonia (kg/ha)               49      L2\_ANO3   Layer2 N-NO3 AppRate (kg/ha)
  21      L1\_ON      Layer1 Organic N (kg/ha)                 50      L2\_ANH3   Layer2 N-NH3 AppRate (kg/ha)
  22      L1\_P       Layer1 Mineral P (kg/ha)                 51      L2\_AON    Layer2 ON AppRate (kg/ha)
  23      L1\_OP      Layer1 Organic P (kg/ha)                 52      L2\_AMP    Layer2 MP AppRate (kg/ha)
  24      L1\_C       Layer1 Carbon (kg/ha)                    53      L2\_AOP    Layer2 OP AppRate (kg/ha)
  25      L1\_NITR    Layer1 N - Nitrified NH3 (kg/ha)         54      UN1        N Uptake by Crop (kg/ha)
  26      L2\_DEP     Layer2 Depth (m)                         55      HUI        Heat Unit Index (none)
  27      L2\_BD      Layer2 Bulk Density (t/m\*\*3)           56      LAI        Leaf Area Index (none)
  28      L2\_NO3     Layer2 N - Nitrate (kg/ha)               57      CPHT       Crop Height (m)
  29      L2\_NH3     Layer2 N - Ammonia (kg/ha)                                  
  ------- ----------- ---------------------------------------- ------- ---------- ----------------------------------

[[[[[[[]{#_Toc357586948 .anchor}]{#_Toc357519807
.anchor}]{#_Toc357440531 .anchor}]{#_Toc357435016
.anchor}]{#_Toc357192631 .anchor}]{#_Toc357176060
.anchor}]{#_Toc357175589 .anchor}\*DN2 is currently under revision, and
AVOL is an initial estimate that is revised within the bidirectional
CMAQ.

EPIC Yearly Extraction Tool
---------------------------

This tool is used primarily to provide data for performing quality
assurance (QA) for EPIC runs.

-   For EPIC spin-up runs, it extracts average EPIC values from the last
    five years of the spin-up simulations.

-   For EPIC application runs, it extracts application-year EPIC
    variables.

In both cases, the tool outputs one crop-specific NetCDF file with 31
variables and one crop-weighted NetCDF file with 22 variables; Table 7
shows the two lists of variables.

**Table 7. EPIC yearly extraction output variables.**

  ------------------------------------------------------ --------- ---------------------------------------- ------- ----------- -----------------------------------------
  **epic2cmaq\_year.nc - crop specific output**                                                             
  Index                                                  Name      Variable                                 Index
  1                                                      GMN       N Mineralized (kg/ha)                    19
  2                                                      NMN       Humus Mineralization (kg/ha)             20
  3                                                      NFIX      N Fixation (kg/ha)                       21
  4                                                      NITR      N - Nitrified NH3 (kg/ha)                22
  5                                                      AVOL      N - Volatilization (kg/ha)               23
  6                                                      DN        N-NO3 Denitrification (kg/ha)            24
  7                                                      YON       N Loss with Sediment (kg/ha)             25
  8                                                      QNO3      N Loss in Surface Runoff (kg/ha)         26
  9                                                      SSFN      N in Subsurface Flow (kg/ha)             27
  10                                                     PRKN      N Loss in Percolate (kg/ha)              28
  11                                                     FNO       N - Organic Fertilizer (kg/ha)           29
  12                                                     FNO3      N - Nitrate Fertilize (kg/ha)            30
  13                                                     FNH3      N - Ammonia Fertilize (kg/ha)            31
  14                                                     OCPD      Organic Carbon in Plow Layer (mt/ha)     32
  15                                                     TOC       Organic Carbon in Soil Profile (mt/ha)   33
  16                                                     TNO3      Total NO3 in Soil Profile (kg/ha)        34
  17                                                     DN2       N-N2O from NO3 Denitrification (kg/ha)   35
  18                                                     YLDG      Grain Yield (t/ha)                       

  **epic2cmaq\_year\_total.nc - crop weighted output**                                                      
  Index                                                  Name      Variable                                 Index
  1                                                      T\_GMN    N Mineralized (mt - metric ton)          14
  2                                                      T\_NMN    Humus Mineralization (mt)                15
  3                                                      T\_NFIX   N Fixation (mt)                          16
  4                                                      T\_NITR   N - Nitrified NH3 (mt)                   17
  5                                                      T\_AVOL   N - Volatilization (mt)                  18
  6                                                      T\_DN     N-NO3 Denitrification (mt)               19
  7                                                      T\_YON    N Loss with Sediment (mt)                20
  8                                                      T\_QNO3   N Loss in Surface Runoff (mt)            21
  9                                                      T\_SSFN   N in Subsurface Flow (mt)                22
  10                                                     T\_PRKN   N Loss in Percolate (mt)                 23
  11                                                     T\_FNO    N - Organic Fertilizer (mt)              24
  12                                                     T\_FNO3   N - Nitrate Fertilizer (mt)              25
  13                                                     T\_FNH3   N - Ammonia Fertilizer (mt)              26
  ------------------------------------------------------ --------- ---------------------------------------- ------- ----------- -----------------------------------------

\*Water on agricultural lands.

The following sample script file, which is contained in the Raster Tools
script directory, has all required environment variables and can be
modified and run at the command line:

> **epicYearlyAverage4QA.csh**

Other Tools and Utilities
=========================

Domain Grid Shapefile Generation Tool
-------------------------------------

Users can apply the domain grid shapefile generation tool to generate a
polygon shapefile for a defined grid domain with the GRIDID attribute.
The GRIDID attribute has values ranging from 1 for the grid cell in the
lower left corner of the domain to the maximum number of cells for the
grid cell in the upper right. The following sample script file can be
modified for domain shapefile generation:

> **generateGridShapefile.csh **

Other Utilities
----------------

The following utility programs are stored in the **util** directory:

-   **goes\_untar.pl** – used to untar downloaded GOES data into the
    format required for the GOES cloud product processing tool.

-   **updateWRFinput\_landuse.R** – used to update the wrfinput file
    using generated land use data by the NLCD and MODIS land cover
    generation tool (see Section 3.1). The updated wrfinput file can be
    used in WRF simulations with the WRF Pleim-Xiu Land Surface Model,
    using the 40 classes of NLCD/MODIS land cover data shown in Table 1.

Acknowledgments
===============

The SA Raster Tools were developed with support from multiple projects:

-   Work assignments from the U.S. EPA under Contract No. EP-W-09-023,
    “Operation of the Center for Community Air Quality Modeling and
    Analysis (CMAS)”

-   NASA Research Opportunities in Space and Earth Sciences (ROSES)
    projects awarded to (1) the Institute for the Environment at the
    University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (contract number
    NNX08AL28G) and (2) the National Space Science and Technology Center
    at the University of Alabama in Huntsville (contract number
    NNX09AT60G).
